mr. president thank you for meeting with
us that this really historic juncture
good to be with Iran relations so you
know as I think about it you've actually
had the most intimate and direct
negotiations with the Iranian leadership
of any president since 1979 okay well I
think that it's important to recognize
that Iran's a complicated country just
like work on complicated country there
is no doubt that given the history
between our two countries that there is
deep mistrust that is not going to fade
away immediately the activities that
they engage in the rhetoric both
anti-american anti-semitic anti-israel
is deeply disturbing there are deep
trends in the country that are contrary
to not only our own national security
interests and views but those of our
allies and friends in the region and
those divisions are real but what we've
also seen is that there is a practical
streak to the an Iranian regime I think
they're concerned about self
preservation I think they are responsive
to some degree to their publics I think
the election of rouhani indicated that
there was an appetite among the Iranian
people for a rejoining with the
international community an emphasis on
economics and the desire to link up with
a global economy and so what we've seen
over the last several years I think is
the opportunity for those forces within
Iran that want to break out of the rigid
framework that they've been in for a
long time to to move in a different
direction it's not a radical break but
it's one that I think offers us the
chance for a different type of
relationship
and this nuclear deal I think is a
potential expression of them you've had
sent letters to the supreme leader
obviously been indirectly receiving
responses back have you learned anything
about him in particular and where he is
right now
through these negotiations I he's a
pretty tough read I don't have great
insight beyond what I think I get from
our intelligence folks I haven't spoken
to him directly in the letters that he
sends there's typically a lot of
reminders of what he perceives as past
grievances against Iran but what is I
think telling is that he did give his
negotiators in this deal the leeway the
capability to make important concessions
that would allow this framework
agreement to come to fruition so what
what that tells me is that although he
is deeply suspicious of the West he is I
think very insular in how he thinks
about international issues as well as
domestic issues and deeply conservative
he does realize that the sanctions the
regime that we put together was
weakening Iran over the long term and
that you know if in fact he wanted to
see Iran re-enter the community of
nations then there were gonna have to be
changes obviously the Israeli government
we know is opposed this deal and they've
been consistently against it a couple of
questions I had one is is it time for a
u.s. Israel mutual defense treaty well
we simply signal to Israelis signal to
the region most of all to the Iranians
don't even think about this well if you
remember the speech that I gave you the
United Nations I was very clear that one
of the core interests of the United
States in my mind and this is how our
administration operated
is that our allies in the region will be
protected we will work with them and
come to their defense and we don't have
a greater ally than Israel in the Middle
East and so you know what I have done is
instruct my team to work with the
Israelis to build on the already
unprecedented military and intelligence
cooperation that's in place I think even
in the midst of the disagreements that
I've had with Prime Minister Netanyahu
both on Iran as well as on the
Palestinian issue I've been consistent
saying that our defense of Israel is
unshakable I would consider it a failure
on my part a fundamental failure of my
presidency if on my watch
or as a consequence of work that I had
done Israel was rendered more vulnerable
not just a strategic failure and and I
think that's not a just a strategic
failure I think that would be a moral
failure I I think that in at a time when
we see anti-semitism on the rise in
Europe at the time when the violence and
chaos of the Middle East so often
expresses itself in the desire to
destroy Israel the easy rhetoric with
which people deny the Holocaust that's
not just an affront to Israel that's
that is a challenge to you know the kind
of common humanity and the values that
we fought for in World War two and a
challenge to what America believes in
terms of the Worth and dignity of all
people so this is something I feel very
deeply and the question is are there
additional things that we can do to make
sure that the Israeli people understand
we've got their backs and that is true
in my administration
I am confident it will be true in
subsequent administration's we have
shown that through
iron dome we've shown it through the
military and intelligence cooperation
that we've engaged in I personally have
shown shown it in in times where there
was great controversy for example last
summer with respect to Gaza I was very
consistent despite international cries
to the contrary that Israel has a right
to defend itself and the Israeli people
are right to be afraid of the
environment that they're in right
they're gonna watch this video what
would you say to them to persuade them
that this is a deal worth pursuing well
what I'd say to them is this you have
every right to be concerned about Iran
this this is a regime that at the
highest levels has expressed the desire
to destroy Israel that has denied the
Holocaust that has expressed venomous
anti-semitism etic you know ideas and is
a big country for the big population and
and is is a as a sophisticated military
so it Israel is right to be concerned
about Iran and they should be absolutely
concerned that Iran doesn't get a
nuclear weapon what I would say the
Israeli people is however that there is
no formula there is no option to prevent
Iran from getting a nuclear weapon that
will be more effective than the
diplomatic initiative and framework that
we put forward and that's demonstrable
we know that a military strike or a
series of military strikes can set back
Iran's nuclear program for a period of
time but almost certainly will prompt
Iran to rush towards a bomb will provide
an excuse for hardliners inside of Iran
to say this is what happens when you
don't have a nuclear weapon America
attacks we know that if we do nothing
other than just maintain sanctions that
they will continue with the building of
their nuclear infrastructure and we'll
have less insight into what exactly
is happening and so this may not be
optimal you know in a perfect world Iran
would say we won't have any nuclear
infrastructure at all but what we know
is that this has become a matter of
pride and nationalism for Iran even
those who we consider moderates and
reformers are supportive of some nuclear
program inside of Iran and given that
they will not capitulate completely
given that they can't meet the threshold
that Prime Minister Netanyahu sets forth
there are no Iranian leaders who would
do that
completely recognizing Israel which he's
now asked for and given the fact that
this is a country that withstood an
eight-year war and a million people dead
so they've shown themselves willing I
think to endure hardship when they
considered a point of national pride or
in some cases national survival for us
to examine those options to say to
ourselves you know what if we can have
vigorous inspections unprecedented and
we know at every point along their
nuclear chain exactly what they're doing
and that lasts for twenty years and for
the first ten years their program is not
just frozen but effectively rolled back
to a larger degree and we know that even
if they wanted to cheat we would have at
least a year before which is about three
times longer than we'd have right now
and we would have insights into their
programs that we've never had before in
that circumstance the notion that we
wouldn't take that deal right now
and that that would not be in Israel's
interest is simply incorrect and look I
have to respect
the fears that the Israeli people have
and I understand that Prime Minister
Netanyahu is expressing the deep-rooted
concerns that a lot of the Israeli
population feel about this but what I
can say to them is number one this is
our best bet by far to make sure Iran
doesn't get a nuclear weapon and number
two what we will be doing even as we
enter into this deal is sending a very
clear message to the Iranians and to the
entire region that if anybody messes
with Israel America will be there and
and I think the combination of a
diplomatic path that puts the nuclear
issue to one side while at the same time
sending a clear message to the Iranians
that you have to change your behavior
more broadly and that we are going to
protect our allies if you continue to
engage in destabilizing aggressive
activity you know I think that's a
combination that potentially at least
not only assures our friends but starts
bringing down the temperature and as you
know Tom the the issue here is not just
Iran's conflict with Israel the issue is
also Iran's conflict with the Sunni
States and what I've done
alongside the negotiations around they
were on nuclear program is also to reach
out to the Gulf countries invite them to
Camp David and suggest to them how can
we work together to strengthen their
defense capabilities against external
aggression so that in each case our
friends and allies are traditional
friends and allies who are rightly
concerned about Iranian behavior overall
don't think that this somehow changes
our traditional commitments one thing
I'm not clear about in the draft
agreement is the framework um if we
suspect that Iran is harboring a nuclear
program outside of the facility so that
in you know southeastern Iran we
discover that on a military base there
is it is that your understanding it is
our
right to inspect that facility that it
anywhere in Iran not just the the known
nuclear sites
well there are a couple of things that
are I think are important been a lot of
debate absolutely be good to clarify in
the first instance
what we've agreed to is is that we will
be able to inspect and and verify what's
happening along the entire nuclear chain
from the uranium mines all the way
through to the final facilities like
Natanz what that means is is that we're
not just gonna have a bunch of folks
posted at two or three or five sites we
are going to be able to see what they're
doing across the board and in fact if
they now wanted to initiate a covert
program that was designed to produce a
nuclear weapon
they'd have to completely duplicate
they'd have to create created a whole
different supply chain that's point
number one point number two we're
actually going to be setting up a
procurement committee that examines what
they're importing what they're bringing
in that they might claim as dual use to
determine whether or not what they're
using is something that would be
appropriate for a peaceful nuclear
program versus a weapons program and
number three what we're going to be
doing is setting up a say a mechanism
whereby yes
ie ei inspectors can go any place any
place in Iran now that we suspect that
we suspect yeah obviously a request will
have to be made Iran could object mm-hmm
but what we have done is to try to
design a mechanism whereby once those
objections are heard that it is not a
final veto that Iran has but in fact
some sort of international mechanism
will be in place that makes a fair
assessment as to whether there should be
an inspection and if they determine it
should be that's the tiebreaker not Iran
saying no
you can't come here so overall what
we're seeing is not just the additional
protocols that IEA has imposed on
countries that are suspected of in the
past having had problematic nuclear
programs we're going even beyond that
and and Iran will be subject to the
kinds of inspections and verification
mechanisms that have never been put in
place before there'll be as vigorous as
they'd ever done I want to go back to
your point about our Sunni Arab allies
and Iran you've spoken about the need to
make our relationship our strategy in
the region they have more of an
equilibrium to it I wonder if you could
talk about that mr. president and also
how do we do that without Saudi Arabia
and Iran fundamentally you know burying
the hatchet or finding a way to contain
the whole Sunni Shiite conflict well
here's how I think about it Tom I think
that our friends in the region are
traditional Sunni States have some very
real external threats but they also have
some internal threats they had the
internal threat of populations that in
some cases are alienated youth that are
underemployed a an ideology that is
destructive and an nihilistic
in some cases just a belief that there
are no legitimate political outlets for
grievances and so part of our job is to
work with these states and say how can
we build your defense capabilities
against external threats but also how
can we strengthen the body politic in
these countries so that Sunnis youth
feel that they've got something other
than ISIL
to to choose from and and that's going
to be a generational process we're not
going to be able to do that overnight
and by the way ultimately it will be up
to those societies to do it the
conversations I want to have with the
Gulf countries is first and foremost how
do they build more effective defense
capabilities I think when you look at
what happens in Syria for example
there's been a great desire for the
United States to get in there and do
something but the question is you know
why is it that we can't have Arabs
fighting on behalf of you know the
terrible human rights abuses that have
been perpetrated or fighting against
what Assad has done I also think that I
can send a message to them about the USS
commitments to work with them and ensure
that they are not invaded from the
outside and and that perhaps will ease
some of their concerns and allow them to
have a more fruitful conversation with
the Iranians what I can't do though is
commit to dealing with some of these
internal issues that they have without
them making some changes that are more
responsive to their people and and I
think that I guess one way of thinking
about this time is when it comes to
external aggression I think we're going
to be there for our friends and I want
to see how we can formalize that a
little bit more than we currently have
and also help build their capacity so
that they feel more confident about
their ability to protect themselves from
external aggression but I think the
biggest threats that they face may not
be coming from Iran invading it's going
to be from dissatisfaction inside their
own countries now that
disentangling that from real terrorist
activity inside their country how we
sort that out how we engage in the
counterterrorism cooperation that that's
been so important to our own security
without automatically legitimizing or
validating whatever repressive tactics
they may employ i think that's a that's
a tough conversation to have but it's
one that we have to have clear there's a
debate inside Iran also on this issue
um and obviously got extremists who will
super impose any deal but there's a few
feels like a legitimate debate inside
going on that you've triggered what
would you say to the Iranian people
about why this is a good deal for them
what I'd say the Iranian people is if we
take the Supreme Leader's fatwa
seriously and that was preceded by
Ayatollah Khomeini's
but would that they will not have a new
that they will not have a nuclear weapon
then the the notion that they would want
to expend so much on a symbolic program
as opposed to harnessing the incredible
talents and ingenuity and
entrepreneurship of the Iranian people
and be part of the world economy and see
their nation excel in those terms that
should be a pretty straightforward
choice for them you know Iran doesn't
need nuclear weapons to be a powerhouse
in the region for that matter what I'd
say the Iranian people is you don't need
to be anti-semitic or anti-israel or
anti Sunni to be a powerhouse in the
region I mean the truth is Iran has all
these potential assets and going for it
where if it was a responsible
international player if it did not
engage in
aggressive rhetoric against its
neighbors if it didn't express an
anti-israeli an anti-jewish sentiment if
it maintained a military that was
sufficient to protect itself but was not
engaging in a whole bunch of proxy wars
around the region by virtue of its size
its resources and its people it'd be an
extremely successful regional power and
and so you know my hope is is that the
Iranian people begin to recognize that
clearly part of the psychology of Iran
is rooted in past experiences the sense
that their country was undermined that
the United States or the West meddled in
first their democracy and then in
supporting the Shah and then in
supporting Iraq and Saddam during that
extremely brutal war and so part of what
I've told my team is we have to
distinguish between the ideologically
driven offensive Iran and the the
defensive Iran that it it feels
vulnerable and sometimes this may be
reacting because they perceive that as
the only way that they can avoid repeats
of the past and and hopefully if we're
able to get this deal finalized and I
want to emphasize we're not done yet
there's a lot of details to be worked
out and you could see backtracking and
slippage and you know real political
difficulties both in Iran and and
obviously here in the United States
Congress still not 50/50 so it's better
than 50/50 50/50 now but but we still
got work to do yeah but but if we're
able to get this done then
what may happen and I'm not counting on
it but what may happen is is that those
forces inside of Iran that say you know
we don't need to view ourselves entirely
through the lens of our war machine
let's excel in science and technology
and job creation and developing our
people yeah that those folks get
stronger and and I say that time but but
emphasizing that the the nuclear deal
that we've put together is not based on
the idea that somehow the regime changes
it is a good deal even if Iran doesn't
change at all even for somebody who who
believes as I suspect Prime Minister
Netanyahu believes that there's no
difference between rouhani and the
supreme leader and they're all you know
adamantly you know anti west and
anti-israel and perennial liars and
cheaters even if you believed all that
this still would be the right thing to
do it would still be the best option for
us to protect ourselves in fact you
could argue that if they are you know
implacably opposed to us all the more
reason for us to want to have a deal in
which we know what they're doing and
that for a long period of time you know
we can prevent them from having a
nuclear weapon yeah you've knocked down
the wall with Burma you're knocked down
a bigger wall with Cuba and potentially
you're gonna knock down a really big
wall with Iran I actually started as a
journalist in 1979 I realized my whole
career has only been defined by
hostility and from my whole generation
in this relationship
I feel like underneath there is a bit of
an Obama doctrine in there and it's take
care of all the strategic concerns and
satisfy them as much as you can but you
you do believe that that the engagement
is possible that that engagement can
lead to different outcomes that are
unpredictable you know in advance can it
do I have that right well how do you see
it you know what I'd combine it with
though tom is also a sense that we are
powerful enough to be able to test these
propositions without putting ourselves
at risk that's interesting and and and
and that's the thing that sometimes as I
hear these debates going on people don't
seem to understand you take some country
like Cuba you know for us to test the
possibility that engagement leads to a
better outcome for the Cuban people
there aren't that many risks for us it's
a it's a tiny little country it's it's
not one that threatens our core security
interests and so for us to test the
proposition and if it turns out that it
doesn't lead to better outcomes we can
adjust our policies the same is true
with respect to Iran a larger country a
dangerous country one that has engaged
in activities that result in the death
of US citizens but the truth the matter
is Iran's defense budget is thirty
billion dollars our defense budget is
closer to six hundred billion dollars
Iran understands that they cannot fight
us and you believe they are datura
belitz noting that they're under
turrible is simply not the case
and and so the so for us to say let's
try understanding that we're preserving
all our options that were not naive but
if in fact we can resolve these issues
diplomatically we are more likely to be
safe more likely to be secured in a
better position to protect our allies
and who knows Iran may change if it
doesn't our deterrence capabilities our
military superiority stays in place so
you know to to use a simple analogy it's
not as if in all these conversations I'm
leaving all
you know rifles that you know at the
door
we're walking these negotiations and
everybody knows that we've got the most
firepower and and and we're not
relinquish offend ourselves or our
allies in that situation why wouldn't we
test it it and and now you know what
what you might hear from Prime Minister
Netanyahu which which I respect is the
notion look
Israel's more vulnerable we don't have
the luxury of testing these propositions
the way you do and and I I completely
understand that and further I completely
understand
Israel's belief that given the tragic
history of the Jewish people they can't
be dependent solely on us for their own
security but what I would say to them is
that not only am i absolutely committed
to making sure that they maintain their
quality of qualitative military edge and
that they can defer defer deter at any
potential future attacks but what I'm
going to do is to make the kinds of
commitments that would give everybody in
the neighborhood including Iran a
clarity that if Israel were to be
attacked by any state that we would
stand stand by them and and that I think
should be you've just made that
commitment right now I mean that's a
signal to that that that should that
should be in sufficient to take
advantage of this once-in-a-lifetime
opportunity to see whether or not we can
at least take the nuclear issue off the
table the the one thing that changes the
equation is when these countries get a
nuclear weapon then how we
approach countries necessarily changes
you know witnessed North Korea which is
a problem state that you know is
rendered a lot more dangerous because of
of their nuclear program if we can
prevent that from happening in anyplace
else in the world that's that's
something where it's worth taking some
risks two quick questions to close mr.
president one is on Congress if the deal
is this good why not let them debate it
and approve it and I understand the
other side of it which is they're people
there who really want to debate it just
to reject it is there a middle ground
let them debate it and have a
non-binding resolution obviously their
choice not yours but how are you
thinking about that now yeah I think
I've reached out to Speaker Boehner and
Mitch McConnell as well as Nancy Pelosi
and Harry Reid and what I've said to
them as we will not only go through all
the details of what the current
framework is and provide them updates in
terms of how the negotiations go going
forward but we are committed to finding
a mechanism for appropriate
congressional involvement and oversight
you're right tom that what I'm not
interested in seeing is folks who are
hell-bent on just defeating any deal
aren't interested in listening the
nuclear scientists aren't interested in
listening the experts but are viewing
this purely through the lens of
partisanship I'm not interested in
endangering a very critical
international agreement on that basis
number two is I've got to be concerned
about setting precedents there has been
a suggestion on the part of some members
of Congress that President United States
doesn't have the power to enter into
binding agreements with other countries
well they're a whole bunch of agreements
that we make all over the world from
protecting our troops
when they're on foreign soil to
arrangements that fall short of a formal
treaty but have always been understood
to be binding on the United States of
America as part of our international
leadership international commitments and
I don't want to set precedents that
suggest that every time a president
enters into one of these agreements that
Congress gets a up or down vote but
having said that I do think that senator
corker the head of the Foreign Relations
Committee is somebody who's sincerely
concerned about this issue and it is a
good and decent man and my hope is is
that we can find something that allows
Congress to express itself but does not
encroach on traditional presidential
prerogatives and ensures that if in fact
we get a good deal that we can go ahead
and implement so um one of these that's
really wonder if it's concerning you is
it people crossing some red lines here
we've seen senators writing a letter to
a foreign leader in the middle of the
negotiations we've seen people fighting
a foreign leader here you know outside
the normal channels of meeting with the
president what's going on here I I do
worry that some traditional boundaries
in how we think about foreign policy
have been crossed
I thought the letter that was sent to
the Supreme Leader was inappropriate I
think that you'll recall there were some
deep disagreements with President Bush
about the Iraq war but the notion that
you would have had a whole bunch of
Democrats sending letters to leaders in
the region or
European leaders who were not part of
the coalition trying to undermine the
president's policies I think is
troubling Mabon um line is that we're
gonna have serious debates serious
disagreements and I welcome those
because that's how our democracy is
supposed to work
and in today's international environment
whatever arguments we have here other
people are here and then reading about
it's not a secret you know that the
Republicans may feel more affinity with
Prime Minister Netanyahu's views of the
Iran issue than they do with mine but
keeping that within some formal
boundaries so that the executive branch
when it goes overseas when it's
communicating with foreign leaders is
understood to be speaking on behalf of
the United States of America not a
divided States of America making sure
that whether that president is a
Democrat or a Republican
that once the debates have been had here
that he or she is the spokesperson on
behalf of u.s. foreign policy and that's
clear to every leader around the world
that's important because without that
what you start getting is multiple
foreign policies confusion among foreign
powers as to who speaks for who and that
ends up being a very dangerous
circumstance that could be exported by
our enemies and could deeply disturb our
friends you also get Israel becoming a
Republican cause not a bipartisan cause
well this this is a this is an area that
you know I've been concerned about look
Israel's a robust rowdy democracy just
like ours and you know they're very few
countries
in the world that where we share so much
we share blood family video cultural
ties that are unequaled and part of what
has always made the us-israeli
relationship so special is that it has
transcended party and and I think that
has to be preserved there there has to
be the ability for me to disagree with a
policy on settlements for example
without being viewed as in some fashion
opposing Israel there has to be a way
for Prime Minister Netanyahu to disagree
with me on policy without being viewed
as anti Democrat and I think the the
right way to do it is to recognize that
as many commonalities as we have there
are going to be strategic differences
here and I think that it is important
for each side to respect the debate that
takes place in the other country and not
try to work just with one side again it
has to do with those boundaries in the
sense that ultimately you have
governments dealing with governments
when it comes to foreign policy that I
think has to be maintained but you know
this has been as hard as anything I do
because of
the the deep affinities that I feel for
the Israeli people and for the Jewish
people it's been a hard on Parvati
personally I mean it has been personally
difficult for me to hear the sort of
expressions that somehow we don't have
this administration has not done
everything it could to look out for
Israel's interest and the suggestion
that when we have very serious policy
differences that that's not you know in
the context of a deep and abiding
friendship and and a concern and
understanding of the threats that the
Jewish people have faced historically
and continue to face that's something
that I feel deeply and I feel personally
and and will continue to do mr.
president IDI
the one question I got will stop here is
that so many people asked me to ask is
when exactly do the sanctions come off a
lot of confusion there in in what's come
out from both sides you could clarify
that that'd be really helpful right
after that there are still details to be
worked out but I think that the basic
framework calls for Iran to take the
steps that it needs to around Fordow and
the centrifuges and so forth at that
point then the UN sanctions are
suspended
although the sanctions related to
proliferation the sanctions related to
ballistic missiles there's a set of
sanctions that remain in place and at
that point then we preserve the ability
to snap back those sanctions if there is
a violation if not though Iran outside
of the proliferation and ballistic
missile issues that
stay in place they're able to get out
from under the sanctions understanding
that this constant monitoring will
potentially trigger you know some sort
of action if they're in violation there
are US sanctions they're related to
Iran's behavior within terrorism Iran's
behavior with respect to human rights
abuses there are certain sanctions that
we have that would remain in place
because they're not related to Iran's
nuclear program and and this I think
gets to a central point that we've made
consistently if in fact we are able to
finalize the nuclear deal and if Iran
abides by it that's a big piece of
business that we've gotten done but it
does not end our problems with Iran and
we are still going to be aggressively
working with our allies and friends to
reduce and hopefully at some point stop
the destabilizing activities that Iran
has engaged in the sponsorship of
terrorist organizations and that may
take some time but it's our belief it's
my belief that we will be in a stronger
position to do so if the nuclear issue
has been put in a box and you know if we
can do that it's possible that Iran
seeing the benefits of sanctions relief
starts focusing more on the economy and
its people and investment will become
investment starts coming in and the
country starts opening up if we've done
a good job in bolstering the sense of
security and defense cooperation between
us and the Sunni States if we have made
even more certain
that the Israeli people are absolutely
protected not just by their own
capacities but also by our commitments
then what's possible is you start seeing
an equilibrium in the region and Sunni
and Shia Saudi and Iran start saying you
know maybe we should lower tensions and
focus on the extremists like ISIL that
would burn down this entire region if
they could but the Iranians need to know
that if they cheat that you won't
hesitate also to take any option off the
table we will absolutely not hesitate
that option always remains and this goes
back to the earlier point that you asked
about an Obama doctrine the doctrine is
we will engage but we preserve all our
capabilities and I've been very clear
that Iran will not get a nuclear weapon
on my watch and and I think they should
understand that we mean it but I say
that hoping that we can conclude this
diplomatic arrangement and that it uh
sure is a new era in us-iranian
relations and just as importantly over
time a new era in Iranian relations with
its neighbors because our interest is
that the one thing I always tell folks
in the region whatever has happened in
the past at this point the u.s. is core
interests in the region are not oil are
not territorial strategic concerns our
core interests are that everybody is
living in peace
that it is orderly that our allies are
not being attacked that children are not
having barrel bombs dropped on them that
massive displacements aren't taking
place
you know we we are our interests in this
sense are really just making sure that
the region is working and if it's
working well then we'll do fine
and you know that's gonna be a big
project given what's taking place but I
think this is at least one place to
start mr. president thank you for
meeting with us right now this is a
really important time and appreciate
this I join up a bit appreciate thank
you much
Oh